Tutorial on endpoint persistency (#101)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/tutorials/core/qos/persistency/persistency.rst

.. |br| raw:: html

  <br/>

.. _tutorials_qos_persistency_persistency:

> Persistent Endpoints using TRANSIENT Durability QoS Policy

Author: 👍

==========================================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

The DDS `Durability QoS Policy
<https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/{FASTDDS_BRANCH}/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#durabilityqospolicy>`_

> specify how much importance ROS 2 nodes give to the data been exchanged. The possible options are explained :ref:`here

Author: 👍

> <concepts_about_qos>` basically:

Author: 👍

> * Durability

Author: never take your reader for granted 😅

>   * *Volatile*: Old data values are considered worthless. Any new node will not received any previous data.

Author: 👍

>   * *Transient local*: Old data values are important. Any new node will receive data generated before its creation.

Author: the correction changes the meaning

>   * *Transient*: Data is so important it is backed up or persisted by a database file. This will guarantee that if a

Author: 👍

>     node crashes it can be reenacted and keep operating without data losses.

Author: correction changes meaning

> Only the *Volatile* and *Transient Local* durability options are ROS 2 builtins. In order set up *Transient* nodes xml

Author: 👍

> configuration files are required as explained in :ref:`this tutorial <tutorials_xml_profiles_intro>`.

Author: 👍

This tutorial provides guidelines on how to set up persistent nodes.

Prerequisites
-------------

Vulcanexus Humble should be installed (:ref:`follow the steps here <linux_binary_installation>`).

> For testing sake using a docker container is often a more convenient approach (:ref:`docker setup <docker_installation>`).

Author: 👍

> In order to test this feature a *Vulcanexus* lightweight docker image (as *core* or *micro*) is enough.

Author: 👍

The images are available for download on *Vulcanexus* `website <https://vulcanexus.org/download>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ docker load -i .\ubuntu-vulcanexus-{DISTRO}-micro.tar

>     1$ docker run -ti --name persistence_testing ubuntu-vulcanexus:humble-micro

Author: 👍

>     2$ docker exec -ti persistence_testing /vulcanexus_entrypoint.sh /bin/bash

Author: 👍

>     2$ docker exec -ti persistence_testing /vulcanexus_entrypoint.sh /bin/bash

Author: As mentioned above, using docker is optional, many people will directly use their computers.

This tutorial requires two terminals: one for the data writer (1) and the other for the reader (2).

> Note that for user convenience the the terminal (1) that launches the container has the overlay loaded in the

Author: 👍

*entrypoint* but any other terminal that connects to it (2) must explicitly load the overlay calling the
``vulcanexus_entripoint.sh`` script.

The concepts introduced here are applied to any ROS 2 nodes and the tutorial will not use a specific package but rely on

> the ROS 2 cli :ref:`capabilities <ROS2Topics>`.

Author: 👍

> To create a publisher node from the ROS 2 command line that sends *TIMES* samples:

Author: 🤔 *sends 5 number of samples* sounds terrible ... are we sure of this?

> To create a publisher node from the ROS 2 command line that sends *TIMES* samples:

Reviewer: Its true,... we could then leave it as it was, withouth _number of_

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 topic pub [-t TIMES] [--qos-durability {system_default,transient_local,volatile,unknown}] topic_name message_type [values]

To create a subscriber node from ROS 2 command line:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 topic echo [--qos-durability {system_default,transient_local,volatile,unknown}] topic_name [message_type]

.. note::

>     The *ros2 topic* command line interface provides convenient parameters to specify node QoS as ``--qos-durability``. |br|

Author: love germans, they don't care about alliteration.

>     Specifying those on ROS 2 packages requires modifying the sources to set appropriately

Author: 👍

    :ref:`ROS 2 client library <ROS-2-Client-Libraries>` QoS structures as
    `rclcpp::QoS <https://docs.ros2.org/latest/api/rclcpp/classrclcpp_1_1QoS.html>`_ or
    `rclpy.qos <https://docs.ros2.org/latest/api/rclpy/api/qos.html#rclpy.qos.QoSProfile>`_.

XML Profile definition
----------------------

In order to specify the desired custom configuration for the Durability QoS policy, an XML file is required (see `Fast
DDS XML profiles <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/{FASTDDS_BRANCH}/fastdds/xml_configuration/xml_configuration.html>`_).

Usually a single configuration file is enough but this tutorial requires two independent persistent databases (for

> writer and reader) in order to show persistency advantages.

Author: 👍

> In the working directory of choice (henceforth */home/tutorial/*) create two files:

Author: *of choice* is an idiom

* A publisher node configuration file: ``writer_config.xml``

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/persistency/writer_config.xml
    :language: xml

* A subscriber node configuration file: ``reader_config.xml``

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/persistency/reader_config.xml
    :language: xml

For each node is specified:

* A database filename as the ``dds.persistence.sqlite3.filename`` property in the default participant profile.

> * An endpoint (``data_writer`` or ``data_reader``) profile, which is associated to the node endpoint using the

Author: 👍

  *topic name* as ``profile_name`` attribute.
  In this tutorial the *topic name* will be **persistency_test**. |br|

>   The endpoint requires a `GUID <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`_ specified as the

Author: why list the endpoint twice?

>   The endpoint requires a `GUID <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`_ specified as the

Reviewer: Okey, thought the enumeration continued, but it was qualifying the former sentence. Then, perhaps we could consider using a point and followed instead

```
...persistency_test. Additonally, the endpoint requires a [GUID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier) specified as the dds.persistence.guid property and a Durability QoS entry that must be set to transient.
```

>   The endpoint requires a `GUID <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`_ specified as the

Reviewer: I think this point was not visited in last revision

>   The endpoint requires a `GUID <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`_ specified as the

Author: 👍

  ``dds.persistence.guid`` property. |br|

>   The endpoint Durability QoS must be set to *transient*.

Author: idem

Environment variables set up
----------------------------

ROS 2 nodes will locate their associated xml configuration files using the ``FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE``
environment variable. For example:

.. code-block:: bash

    export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=/home/tutorial/writer_config.xml

> Testing Publisher Persistency

Author: Doesn't convey the same meaning. Here we are testing that something works not just running the node with a specific QoS setup.

-----------------------------

The following steps will show how using persistent endpoints prevents subscribers from receiving duplicated data
when a publisher crashes.

#. Launch persistent publisher and subscriber.

    .. code-block:: bash

        1$ export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=/home/tutorial/writer_config.xml
        1$ ros2 topic pub --times 5 --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String "{data: 'Hello'}"

        2$ export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=/home/tutorial/reader_config.xml

>         2$ ros2 topic echo --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String

Author: 👍

>    Note that we must specify *system_default* as durability in order to enforce the use of the xml file provided value.

Reviewer: Its fine then

#. Relaunch the publisher again and check the subscriber is able to receive the samples.

    .. code-block:: bash

>         1$ ros2 topic pub --times 5 --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String "{data: 'Hello'}"

Author: 👍

#. Delete the publisher database. Now the publisher state is reset. Relaunch the publisher and check the first 10 samples are
   discarded by the subscriber because they were already received.

    .. code-block:: bash

        1$ rm writer_database.db

>         1$ ros2 topic pub --times 11 --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String "{data: 'Hello'}"

Author: 👍

> Testing Subscriber Persistency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running Subscriber Persistency Example
```
For the sake of uniformity with other tutorials, consider changing the example tittle to something like _Running Subscriber Persistency Example_

> Testing Subscriber Persistency

Author: Already been discussed in the Publisher testing. It conveys a different meaning. We are testing something not only showing how it can be set up.

------------------------------

> The following steps will show how using persistent endpoints prevents subscribers from receiving duplicated data

Author: why?

when the subscriber crashes and it's relaunched.

#. Launch persistent publisher and subscriber.

    .. code-block:: bash

        1$ export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=/home/tutorial/writer_config.xml
        1$ ros2 topic pub --times 5 --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String "{data: 'Hello'}"

        2$ export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=/home/tutorial/reader_config.xml

>         2$ ros2 topic echo --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String

Author: We have a devoted *Prerequisites* section precisely to avoid introducing *docker* commands.
Remember that using docker is optional, many people will directly their computers.

>         2$ ros2 topic echo --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String

Author: The format, of course, I'm gonna change 😅

#. Delete the publisher database. Relaunch the publisher and check the first 5 samples are
   discarded by the subscriber because they were already received.

    .. code-block:: bash

        1$ rm writer_database.db

>         1$ ros2 topic pub --times 10 --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String "{data: 'Hello'}"

Author: 👍

#. Delete the publisher database. Restart the subscriber node. Relaunch the publisher and check the first 10 samples are
   discarded by the subscriber because they were already received. Note the new subscriber deduced it from its
   persistence database.

    .. code-block:: bash

        1$ rm writer_database.db
        1$ ros2 topic pub --times 11 --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String "{data: 'Hello'}"

        2 <CTRL-C>

>         2$ ros2 topic echo --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String

Author: 👍

  * *Volatile*: Old data values are ignored. Any new node will not receive any previous data.
  * *Transient local*: Old data values are important. Any new node will receive data generated before its creation.
  * *Transient*: Data is so important that it is backed up or persisted into a database file. This will guarantee that if a
    node crashes it can be reenacted and keep operating without data losses.

Only *Volatile* and *Transient Local* durability options are ROS 2 builtins. In order to set up *Transient* nodes, xml
configuration files are required as explained in :ref:`the XML profiles tutorial <tutorials_xml_profiles_intro>`. This tutorial
provides guidelines on how to set up persistent nodes.

Prerequisites
-------------

Vulcanexus Humble should be installed (:ref:`follow the steps here <linux_binary_installation>`).
For testing sake, using a docker container is often a more convenient approach (:ref:`docker setup <docker_installation>`).
In order to test this feature, a *Vulcanexus* lightweight docker image (as *core* or *micro*) is enough.
The images are available for download on *Vulcanexus* `website <https://vulcanexus.org/download>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

>     docker load -i .\ubuntu-vulcanexus-{DISTRO}-micro.tar

Reviewer: Windows :smiley: 
```suggestion
    docker load -i ./ubuntu-vulcanexus-{DISTRO}-micro.tar
```

Author: 👍

* A database filename as the ``dds.persistence.sqlite3.filename`` property in the default participant profile.

* An endpoint (``data_writer`` or ``data_reader``) profile which:

  + is associated to the node using the *topic name* as ``profile_name`` attribute. In this tutorial the
    *topic name* will be **persistency_test**.

>   + The endpoint requires a `GUID <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`_ specified as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + requires a `GUID <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`_ specified as
```
As _which:_ already refers to the endpoint

    the ``dds.persistence.guid`` property.

>   + The endpoint Durability QoS must be set to *transient*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + specifies a Durability QoS that must be set to *transient*.
```
Same as above, perhaps another words can be used

    .. code-block:: bash

        # Terminal 1
        export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=/home/tutorial/writer_config.xml

>         ros2 topic pub --times 5 --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String "{data: 'Hello'}"

Reviewer: Consider including ```docker run -ti --name persistence_testing ubuntu-vulcanexus:humble-micro``` command first. Something "from sratch" may be useful for users entering directly to this this section. 

If it is accepted, we could replicate it to the subscriber example.

Author: I don't see it. Besides, this is the same structure we used in the [Fast-DDS examples](https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/docker/fastdds/fast_dds.html).

        # Terminal 2
        export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=/home/tutorial/reader_config.xml

>         ros2 topic echo --qos-durability system_default /persistency_test std_msgs/String

Reviewer: Consider including `docker exec -ti persistence_testing /vulcanexus_entrypoint.sh /bin/bash` command first. Same reasoning as above.

If it is accepted, we could replicate it to the subscriber example.

Author: idem
